The Siege of BerlinWE were going up Avenue des Champs-Elysées with Dr. V——, asking the shell-riddled walls, and thesidewalks torn up by grape-shot, for the story of the siege of Paris, when, just before we reached theRond-point de l’Etoile, the doctor stopped and, pointing to one of the great corner houses so proudlygrouped about the Arc de Triomphe, said to me: “Do you see those four closed windows up there on that balcony? In the early days of August, thatterrible August of last year, so heavily laden with storms and disasters, I was called there to see a case ofapoplexy. It was the apartment of Colonel Jouve, a cuirassier of the First Empire, an old enthusiast on thesubject of glory and patriotism, who had come to live on the Champs-Élysées, in an apartment with abalcony, at the outbreak of the war. Guess why? In order to witness the triumphant return of our troops.Poor old fellow! The news of Wissembourg reached him just as he was leaving the table. When he readthe name of Napoleon at the foot of that bulletin of defeat, he fell like a log. “I found the former cuirassier stretched out at full length on the carpet, 

his face covered with blood, andas lifeless as if he had received a blow on the head from a poleaxe. He must have been very tall when hewas standing; lying there, he looked enormous. Handsome features, magnificent teeth, a fleece of curlywhite hair, eighty years with the appearance of sixty. Beside him was his granddaughter, on her kneesand bathed in tears. She looked like him. One who saw them side by side might have taken them for twobeautiful Greek medallions, struck from the same die, one of which was old and earth-coloured, a littleroughened on the edges, the other resplendent and clean-cut, in all the brilliancy and smoothness of afresh impression. “The child’s grief touched me. Daughter and granddaughter of soldiers, her father was on MacMahon’sstaff, and the image of that tall old man stretched out before her evoked in her mind another image noless terrible. I comforted her as best I could, but in reality I had little hope. We had to do with a case ofcomplete paralysis on one side, and at eighty years of age few people recover from it. For three days thepatient lay in the same state of inanition and stupor. Then the news of Reichshofen reached Paris. Youremember in what a strange way it came. Up to the evening, we all believed in a great victory, twentythousand Prussians killed and the Prince Royal a prisoner. I know not by what miracle, what magneticcurrent, an echo of that national rejoicing sought out our poor deaf-mute in the depths of his paralysis;but the fact is that on that evening, when I approached his bed, I did not find the same man there. His eyewas almost clear, his tongue less heavy. He had the strength to smile at me, and he stammered twice: “‘Vic-to-ry!’“And as I gave him details of the grand exploit of MacMahon, I saw that his features relaxed and hisface lighted up.“When I left the room, the girl was waiting for me at the door, pale as death. She was sobbing.“‘But he is saved!’ I said, taking her hands.“The unhappy child hardly had the courage to reply. The true report of Reichshofen had been placarded;MacMahon in retreat, the whole army crushed. We gazed at each other in consternation. She was indespair, thinking of her father. I trembled, thinking of the old man. He certainly could not stand this freshshock. And yet what were we to do? Leave him his joy, and the illusions which had revived him? But inthat case we must lie.“‘Very well, I will lie!’ said the heroic girl, quickly wiping away her tears; and with radiant face sheentered her grandfather’s chamber. “It was a hard task that she had undertaken. The first few days she had no great difficulty. The goodman’s brain was feeble, and he allowed himself to be deceived like a child. But with returning health hisideas became clearer. We had to keep him posted concerning the movement of the armies, to draw upmilitary bulletins for him. Really, it was pitiful to see that lovely child leaning night and day over hermap of Germany, pinning little flags upon it, and struggling to lay out a glorious campaign: Bazainebesieging Berlin, Froissart in Bavaria, MacMahon on the Baltic. For all this she asked my advice, and Iassisted her as well as I could; but it was the grandfather who was especially useful to us in thatimaginary invasion. He had conquered Germany so many times under the First Empire! He knew all thestrokes beforehand: ‘Now this is where they will go. Now this is what they will do’; and his anticipationswere always realised, which did not fail to make him very proud. “Unlucky it was of no avail for us to take cities and win battles; we never went quickly enough for him.That old man was insatiable! Every day, when I arrived, I learned of some new military exploit.“‘Doctor, we have taken Mayence,’ the girl would say to me, coming to meet me with a heart-brokensmile, and I would hear through the door a joyous voice shouting to me:“‘They are getting on! They are getting on! In a week we shall be in Berlin!’“At that moment the Prussians were only a week’s march from Paris. We asked ourselves at first if itwould be better to take him into the provinces; but as soon as we were outside the city, the state of thecountry would have told him everything, and I considered him still too weak, too much benumbed by hisgreat shock, to let him know the truth. So we decided to remain. “The first day of the investment of Paris, I went up to their rooms, I remember, deeply moved, with thatagony at the heart which the closed gates, the fighting under the walls, and our suburbs turned intofrontiers, gave us all. I found the good man seated on his bed, proud and jubilant.“‘Well,’ he said, ‘so the siege has begun!’“I gazed at him in blank amazement.“‘What, colonel! you know?’“His granddaughter turned towards me:“‘Why, yes, doctor, that’s the great news. The siege of Berlin has begun.’ “As she said this, she plied her needle with such a sedate and placid air! How could he have suspectedanything? He could not hear the guns of the forts. He could not see our unfortunate Paris, all in confusionand dreadful to behold. What he saw from his bed was a section of the Arc de Triomphe, and in his room,about him, a collection of bric-a-brac of the First Empire, well adapted to maintain his illusion. Portraitsof marshals, engravings of battles, the King of Rome in a baby’s dress, tall consoles adorned with coppertrophies, laden with imperial relics, medals, bronzes, a miniature of St. Helena, under a globe, picturesrepresenting the same lady all becurled, in a ball-dress of yellow, with leg-of-mutton sleeves and brighteyes;—and all these things: consoles, King of Rome, marshals, yellow ladies, with the high-necked,short-waisted dresses, the bestarched stiffness, which was the charm of 1806. Gallant colonel! It was thatatmosphere of victories and conquests, even more than anything we could say to him, that made himbelieve so innocently in the siege of Berlin. “From that day our military operations were much simplified. To take Berlin was only a matter ofpatience. From time to time, when the old man was too much bored, we would read him a letter from hisson—an imaginary letter, of course, for nothing was allowed to enter Paris, and since Sedan,MacMahon’s aide-de-camp had been sent to a German fortress. You can imagine the despair of that poorchild, without news from her father, knowing that he was a prisoner, in need of everything, perhaps sick,and she obliged to represent him as writing joyful letters, a little short, perhaps, but such as a soldier onthe field might be expected to write, always marching forward through a conquered country. Sometimesher strength gave way; then they were without news for weeks. But the old man became anxious, couldnot sleep. Thereupon a letter from Germany would speedily arrive, which she would bring to his bedsideand read joyously, forcing back her tears. The colonel would listen religiously, smile with a knowing air,approve, criticise, and explain to us the passages that seemed a little confused. But where he wasespecially grand was in the replies that he sent to his son. ‘Never forget that you are a Frenchman,’ hewould say to him. ‘Be generous to those poor people. Don’t make the invasion too hard for them.’ Andthere were recommendations without end, admirable preachments up


on respect for the proprieties, thecourtesy which should be shown to the ladies, a complete code of military honour for the use ofconquerors. He interspersed also some general considerations upon politics, the conditions of peace to beimposed upon the vanquished. Thereupon I must say that he was not exacting. “‘A war indemnity, and nothing more. What is the use of taking their provinces? Is it possible to turnGermany into France?’“He dictated this in a firm voice; and one was conscious of such candour in his words, of such a noble,patriotic faith, that it was impossible not to be moved while listening to him. “Meanwhile the siege went on—not the siege of Berlin, alas! It was the time of intense cold, of thebombardment, of epidemics and of famine. But, thanks to our care, to our efforts, to the unwearyingaffection which multiplied itself about him, the old man’s serenity was not disturbed for an instant. Tothe very end I was able to obtain white bread and fresh meat for him. There was none for anybody buthim, to be sure; and you can imagine nothing more touching than those breakfasts of the grandfather, soinnocently selfish—the old man seated on his bed, fresh and smiling, with a napkin at his chin, and hisgranddaughter beside him, a little pale because of privations, guiding his hand, helping him to drink, andto eat all those forbidden good things. Then, enlivened by the repast, in the comfort of his warm room,the winter wind whistling outside and the snow eddying about his windows, the ex-cuirassier wouldrecall his campaigns in the north and would describe to us for the hundredth time that terrible retreatfrom Russia, when they had nothing to eat but frozen biscuit and horseflesh.“‘Do you understand that, my love? We had horseflesh!’“I rather think that she did understand it. For two months she had had nothing else. From that day,however, as the period of convalescence drew near, our task about the patient became more difficult.That numbness of all his senses, of all his members, which had served us so well hitherto, began todisappear. Two or three times, the terrible volleys from Porte Maillot had made him jump, with his 
earspricked up like a hunting-dog; we were obliged to invent a final victory of Bazaine under the walls ofBerlin, and guns fired in his honour at the Invalides. Another day when his bed had been moved to thewindow—it was, I believe, the Thursday of Buzenval—he saw large numbers of National Guardscollected on Avenue de la Grande Armée.“‘What are all those troops?’ asked the good man; and we heard him mutter between his teeth:“‘Poorly set up! Poorly set up!’“That was all; but we understood that we must take great precautions thenceforth. Unluckily we did nottake enough.“One evening when I arrived, the girl came to me in great trouble.“‘They are to march into the city to-morrow,’ she said.“Was the grandfather’s door open? In truth, on thinking it over afterwards, I remembered that his facewore an extraordinary expression that night. It is probable that he had overheard us. But we were talkingof the Prussians; and the good man was thinking of the French, of that triumphal entry which he had beenawaiting so long—MacMahon
 marching down the avenue amid flowers and flourishes of trumpets, hisson beside him, and he, the old colonel, on 
his balcony, in full uniform as at Lutzen, saluting the tornflags and the eagles blackened by powder.“Poor Father Jouve! He had imagined doubtless that we intended to prevent him from witnessing thatparade of our troops, in order to avoid too great excitement. So he was very careful not to mention it toany one; but the next day, at the very hour when the Prussian battalions entered hesitatingly upon thelong road which leads from Porte Maillot to the Tuileries, the window up there opened softly, and thecolonel appeared on the balcony, with his helmet, his long sword, all the glorious old array of one ofMilhaud’s cuirassiers. I wonder still what effort of the will, what sudden outburst of life had placed himthus upon his feet and in his harness. This much is sure, that he was there, standing behind the rail,amazed to find the broad avenues so silent, the blinds of the houses closed, Paris as gloomy as a huge lazaretto, flags everywhere, but such strange flags, white with little crosses, and no one to go to meet oursoldiers.“For a moment he might have thought that he was mistaken.“But no! Yonder, behind the Arc de Triomphe, there was a confused rumbling, a black line approachingin the rising sunlight. Then, little by little, the points of the helmets gleamed, the little drums of Jenabegan to beat, and beneath the Arc de Triomphe, while the heavy tramp of the regiments and the clashingof the sabres beat time, Schubert’s Triumphal March burst forth!“Thereupon in the deathlike silence of the square, a cry rang out, a terrible cry: ‘To arms! To arms! ThePrussians!’ and the four uhlans of the vanguard saw up yonder, on the balcony, a tall old man wave hisarms, stagger, and fall. That time, Colonel Jouve was really dead.”
The Siege of BerlinWE were going up Avenue des Champs-Elysées with Dr. V——, asking the shell-riddled walls, and thesidewalks torn up by grape-shot, for the story of the siege of Paris, when, just before we reached theRond-point de l’Etoile, the doctor stopped and, pointing to one of the great corner houses so proudlygrouped about the Arc de Triomphe, said to me: “Do you see those four closed windows up there on that balcony? In the early days of August, thatterrible August of last year, so heavily laden with storms and disasters, I was called there to see a case ofapoplexy. It was the apartment of Colonel Jouve, a cuirassier of the First Empire, an old enthusiast on thesubject of glory and patriotism, who had come to live on the Champs-Élysées, in an apartment with abalcony, at the outbreak of the war. Guess why? In order to witness the triumphant return of our troops.Poor old fellow! The news of Wissembourg reached him just as he was leaving the table. When he readthe name of Napoleon at the foot of that bulletin of defeat, he fell like a log. “I found the former cuirassier stretched out at full length on the carpet, his fac
e covered with blood, andas lifeless as if he had received a blow on the head from a poleaxe. He must have been very tall when hewas standing; lying there, he looked enormous. Handsome features, magnificent teeth, a fleece of curlywhite hair, eighty years with the appearance of sixty. Beside him was his granddaughter, on her kneesand bathed in tears. She looked like him. One who saw them side by side might have taken them for twobeautiful Greek medallions, struck from the same die, one of which was old and earth-coloured, a littleroughened on the edges, the other resplendent and clean-cut, in all the brilliancy and smoothness of afresh impression. “The child’s grief touched me. Daughter and granddaughter of soldiers, her father was on MacMahon’sstaff, and the image of that tall old man stretched out before her evoked in her mind another image noless terrible. I comforted her as best I could, but in reality I had little hope. We had to do with a case ofcomplete paralysis on one side, and at eighty years of age few people recover from it. For three days thepatient lay in the same state of inanition and stupor. Then the news of Reichshofen reached Paris. Youremember in what a strange way it came. Up to the evening, we all believed in a great victory, twentythousand Prussians killed and the Prince Royal a prisoner. I know not by what miracle, what magneticcurrent, an echo of that national rejoicing sought out our poor deaf-mute in the depths of his paralysis;but the fact is that on that evening, when I approached his bed, I did not find the same man there. His eyewas almost clear, his tongue less heavy. He had the strength to smile at me, and he stammered twice: “‘Vic-to-ry!’“And as I gave him details of the grand exploit of MacMahon, I saw that his features relaxed and hisface lighted up.“When I left the room, the girl was waiting for me at the door, pale as death. She was sobbing.“‘But he is saved!’ I said, taking her hands.“The unhappy child hardly had the courage to reply. The true report of Reichshofen had been placarded;MacMahon in retreat, the whole army crushed. We gazed at each other in consternation. She was indespair, thinking of her father. I trembled, thinking of the old man. He certainly could not stand this freshshock. And yet what were we to do? Leave him his joy, and the illusions which had revived him? But inthat case we must lie.“‘Very well, I will lie!’ said the heroic girl, quickly wiping away her tears; and with radiant face sheentered her grandfather’s chamber. “It was a hard task that she had undertaken. The first few days she had no great difficulty. The goodman’s brain was feeble, and he allowed himself to be deceived like a child. But with returning health hisideas became clearer. We had to keep him posted concerning the movement of the armies, to draw upmilitary bulletins for him. Really, it was pitiful to see that lovely child leaning night and day over hermap of Germany, pinning little flags upon it, and struggling to lay out a glorious campaign: Bazainebesieging Berlin, Froissart in Bavaria, MacMahon on the Baltic. For all this she asked my advice, and Iassisted her as well as I could; but it was the grandfather who was especially useful to us in thatimaginary invasion. He had conquered Germany so many times under the First Empire! He knew all thestrokes beforehand: ‘Now this is where they will go. Now this is what they will do’; and his anticipationswere always realised, which did not fail to make him very proud. “Unlucky it was of no avail for us to take cities and win battles; we never went quickly enough for him.That old man was insatiable! Every day, when I arrived, I learned of some new military exploit.“‘Doctor, we have taken Mayence,’ the girl would say to me, coming to meet me with a heart-brokensmile, and I would hear through the door a joyous voice shouting to me:“‘They are getting on! They are getting on! In a week we shall be in Berlin!’“At that moment the Prussians were only a week’s march from Paris. We asked ourselves at first if itwould be better to take him into the provinces; bu
t as soon as we were outside the city, the state of thecountry would have told him everything, and I considered him still too weak, too much benumbed by hisgreat shock, to let him know the truth. So we decided to remain. “The first day of the investment of Paris, I went up to their rooms, I remember, deeply moved, with thatagony at the heart which the closed gates, the fighting under the walls, and our suburbs turned intofrontiers, gave us all. I found the good man seated on his bed, proud and jubilant.“‘Well,’ he said, ‘so the siege has begun!’“I gazed at him in blank amazement.“‘What, colonel! you know?’“His granddaughter turned towards me:“‘Why, yes, doctor, that’s the great news. The siege of Berlin has begun.’ “As she said this, she plied her needle with such a sedate and placid air! How could he have suspectedanything? He could not hear the guns of the forts. He could not see our unfortunate Paris, all in confusionand dreadful to behold. What he saw from his bed was a section of the Arc de Triomphe, and in his room,about him, a collection of bric-a-brac of the First Empire, well adapted to maintain his illusion. Portraitsof marshals, engravings of battles, the King of Rome in a baby’s dress, tall consoles adorned with coppertrophies, laden with imperial relics, medals, bronzes, a miniature of St. Helena, under a globe, picturesrepresenting the same lady all becurled, in a ball-dress of yellow, with leg-of-mutton sleeves and brighteyes;—and all these things: consoles, King of Rome, marshals, yellow ladies, with the high-necked,short-waisted dresses, the bestarched stiffness, which was the charm of 1806. Gallant colonel! It was thatatmosphere of victories and conquests, even more than anything we could say to him, that made himbelieve so innocently in the siege of Berlin. “From that day our military operations were much simplified. To take Berlin was only a matter ofpatience. From time to time, when the old man was too much bored, we would read him a letter from hisson—an imaginary letter, of course, for nothing was allowed to enter Paris, and since Sedan,MacMahon’s aide-de-camp had been sent to a German fortress. You can imagine the despair of that poorchild, without news from her father, knowing that he was a prisoner, in need of everything, perhaps sick,and she obliged to represent him as writing joyful letters, a little short, perhaps, but such as a soldier onthe field might be expected to write, always marching forward through a conquered country. Sometimesher strength gave way; then they were without news for weeks. But the old man became anxious, couldnot sleep. Thereupon a letter from Germany would speedily arrive, which she would bring to his bedsideand read joyously, forcing back her tears. The colonel would listen religiously, smile with a knowing air,approve, criticise, and explain to us the passages that seemed a little confused. But where he wasespecially grand was in the replies that he sent to his son. ‘Never forget that you are a Frenchman,’ hewould say to him. ‘Be generous to those poor people. Don’t make the invasion too hard for them.’ Andthere were recommendati
ons without end, admirable preachments upon respect for 
the proprieties, thecourtesy which should be shown to the ladies, a complete code of military honour for the use ofconquerors. He interspersed also some general considerations upon politics, the conditions of peace to beimposed upon the vanquished. Thereupon I must say that he was not exacting. “‘A war indemnity, and nothing more. What is the use of taking their provinces? Is it possible to turnGermany into France?’“He dictated this in a firm voice; and one was conscious of such candour in his words, of such a noble,patriotic faith, that it was impossible not to be moved while listening to him. “Meanwhile the siege went on—not the siege of Berlin, alas! It was the time of intense cold, of thebombardment, of epidemics and of famine. But, thanks to our care, to our efforts, to the unwearyingaffection which multiplied itself about him, the old man’s serenity was not disturbed for an instant. Tothe very end I was able to obtain white bread and fresh meat for him. There was none for anybody buthim, to be sure; and you can imagine nothing more touching than those breakfasts of the grand

father, soinnocently selfish—the old man seated on his bed, fresh and smiling, with a napkin at his chin, and hisgranddaughter beside him, a little pale because of privations, guiding his hand, helping him to drink, andto eat all those forbidden good things. Then, enlivened by the repast, in the comfort of his warm room,the winter wind whistling outside and the snow eddying about his windows, the ex-cuirassier wouldrecall his campaigns in the north and would describe to us for the hundredth time that terrible retreatfrom Russia, when they had nothing to eat but frozen biscuit and horseflesh.“‘Do you understand that, my love? We had horseflesh!’“I rather think that she did understand it. For two months she had had nothing else. From that day,however, as the period of convalescence drew near, our task about the patient became more difficult.That numbness of all his senses, of all his members, which had served us so well hitherto, began todisappear. Two or three times, the terrible volleys from Porte Maillot had made him jump, with his earspricked up like a hunting-dog; we were obliged to invent a final victory of Bazaine under the walls ofBerlin, and guns fired in his honour at the Invalides. Another day when his bed had been moved to thewindow—it was, I believe, the Thursday of Buzenval—he saw large numbers of National Guardscollected on Avenue de la Grande Armée.“‘What are all those troops?’ asked the good man; and we heard him mutter between his teeth:“‘Poorly set up! Poorly set up!’“That was all; but we understood that we must take great precautions thenceforth. Unluckily we did nottake enough.“One evening when I arrived, the girl came to me in great trouble.“‘They are to march into the city to-morrow,’ she said.“Was the grandfather’s door open? In truth, on thinking it over afterwards, I remembered that his facewore an extraordinary expression that night. It is probable that he had overheard us. But we were talkingof the Prussians; and the good man was thinking of the French, of that triumphal entry which he had beenawaiting so long—MacMahon marching down the avenue amid flowers and flourishes of trumpets, hisson beside him, and he, the old colonel, on his balcony, in full uniform as at Lutzen, saluting the tornflags and the eagles blackened by powder.“Poor Father Jouve! He had imagined doubtless that we intended to prevent him from witnessing thatparade of our troops, in order to avoid too great excitement. So he was very careful not to mention it toany one; but the next day, at the very hour when the Prussian battalions entered hesitatingly upon thelong road which leads from Porte Maillot to the Tuileries, the window up there opened softly, and thecolonel appeared on the balcony, with his helmet, his long sword, all the glorious old array of one ofMilhaud’s cuirassiers. I wonder still what effort of the will, what sudden outburst of life had placed himthus upon his feet and in his harness. This much is sure, that he was there, standing behind the rail,amazed to find the broad avenues so silent, the blinds of the houses closed, Paris as gloomy as a huge lazaretto
, flags everywhere, but such strange flags, white with little crosses, and no one to go to meet oursoldiers.“For a moment he might have thought that he was mistaken.“But no! Yonder, behind the Arc de Triomphe, there was a confused rumbling, a black line approachingin the rising sunlight. Then, little by little, the points of the helmets gleamed, the little drums of Jenabegan to beat, and beneath the Arc de Triomphe, while the heavy tramp of the regiments and the clashingof the sabres beat time, Schubert’s Triumphal March burst forth!“Thereupon in the deathlike silence of the square, a cry rang out, a terrible cry: ‘To arms! To arms! ThePrussians!’ and the four uhlans of the vanguard saw up yonder, on the balcony, a tall old man wave hisarms, stagger, and fall. That time, Colonel Jouve was really dead.”
The Siege of BerlinWE were going up Avenue des Champs-Elysées with Dr. V——, asking the shell-riddled walls, and thesidewalks torn
 up by grape-shot, for the story of the siege of Paris, when, just before we reached theRond-point de l’Etoile, the doctor stopped and, pointing to one of the great corner houses so proudlygrouped about the Arc de Triomphe, said to me: “Do you see those four closed windows up there on that balcony? In the early days of August, thatterrible August of last year, so heavily laden with storms and disasters, I was called there to see a case ofapoplexy. It was the apartment of Colonel Jouve, a cuirassier of the First Empire, an old enthusiast on thesubject of glory and patriotism, who had come to live on the Champs-Élysées, in an apartment with abalcony, at the outbreak of the war. Guess why? In order to witness the triumphant return of our troops.Poor old fellow! The news of Wissembourg reached him just as he was leaving the table. When he readthe name of Napoleon at the foot of that bulletin of defeat, he fell like a log. “I found the former cuirassier stretched out at full length on the carpet, his face covered with blood, andas lifeless as if he had received 

a blow on the head from a poleaxe
. He must have been very tall when hewas standing; lying there, he looked enormous. Handsome features, magnificent teeth, a fleece of curlywhite hair, eighty years with the appearance of sixty. Beside him was his granddaughter, on her kneesand bathed in tears. She looked like him. One who saw them side by side might have taken them for twobeautiful Greek medallions, struck from the same die, one of which was old and earth-coloured, a littleroughened on the edges, the other resplendent and clean-cut, in all the brilliancy and smoothness of afresh impression. “The child’s grief touched me. Daughter and granddaughter of soldiers, her father was on MacMahon’sstaff, and the image of that tall old man stretched out before her evoked in her mind another image noless terrible. I comforted her as best I could, but in reality I had little hope. We had to do with a case ofcomplete paralysis on one side, and at eighty years of age few people recover from it. For three days thepatient lay in the same state of inanition and stupor. Then the news of Reichshofen reached Paris. Youremember in what a strange way it came. Up to the evening, we all believed in a great victory, twentythousand Prussians killed and the Prince Royal a prisoner. I know not by what miracle, what magneticcurrent, an echo of that national rejoicing sought out our poor deaf-mute in the depths of his paralysis;but the fact is that on that evening, when I approached his bed, I did not find the same man there. His eyewas almost clear, his tongue less heavy. He had the strength to smile at me, and he stammered twice: “‘Vic-to-ry!’“And as I gave him details of the grand exploit of MacMahon, I saw that his features relaxed and hisface lighted up.“When I left the room, the girl was waiting for me at the door, pale as death. She was sobbing.“‘But he is saved!’ I said, taking her hands.“The unhappy child hardly had the courage to reply. The true report of Reichshofen had been placarded;MacMahon in retreat, the whole army crushed. We gazed at each other in consternation. She was indespair, thinking of her father. I trembled, thinking of the old man. He certainly could not stand this freshshock. And yet what were we to do? Leave him his joy, and the illusions which had revived him? But inthat case we must lie.“‘Very well, I will lie!’ said the heroic girl, quickly wiping away her tears; and with radiant face sheentered her grandfather’s chamber. “It was a hard task that she had undertaken. The first few days she had no great difficulty. The goodman’s brain was feeble, and he allowed himself to be deceived like a child. But with returning health hisideas became clearer. We had to keep him posted concerning the movement of the armies, to draw upmilitary bulletins for him. Really, it was pitiful to see that lovely child leaning night and day over hermap of Germany, pinning little flags upon it, and struggling to lay out a glorious campaign: Bazainebesieging Berlin, Froissart in Bavaria, MacMahon on the Baltic. For all this she asked my advice, and Iassisted her as well as I could; but it was the grandfather who was especia

lly useful to us in thatimaginary invasion. He had conquered Germany so many times under the First Empire! He knew all thestrokes beforehand: ‘Now this is where they will go. Now this is what they will do’; and his anticipationswere always realised, which did not fail to make him very proud. “Unlucky it was of no avail for us to take cities and win battles; we never went quickly enough for him.That old man was insatiable! Every day, when I arrived, I learned of some new military exploit.“‘Doctor, we have taken Mayence,’ the girl would say to me, coming to meet me with a heart-brokensmile, and I would hear through the door a joyous voice shouting to me:“‘They are getting on! They are getting on! In a week we shall be in Berlin!’“At that moment the Prussians were only a week’s march from Paris. We asked ourselves at first if itwould be better to take him into the provinces; but as soon as we were outside the city, the state of thecountry would have told him everything, and I considered him still too weak, too much benumbed by hisgreat shock, to let him know the truth. So we decided to remain. “The first day of the investment of Paris, I went up to their rooms, I remember, deeply moved, with thatagony at the heart which the closed gates, the fighting under the walls, and our suburbs turned intofrontiers, gave us all. I found the good man seated on his bed, proud and jubilant.“‘Well,’ he said, ‘so the siege has begun!’“I gazed at him in blank amazement.“‘What, colonel! you know?’“His granddaughter turned towards me:“‘Why, yes, doctor, that’s the great news. The siege of Berlin has begun.’ “As she said this, she plied her needle with such a sedate and placid air! How could he have suspectedanything? He could not hear the guns of the forts. He could not see our unfortunate Paris, all in confusionand dreadful to behold. What he saw from his bed was a section of the Arc de Triomphe, and in his room,about him, a collection of bric-a-brac of the First Empire, well adapted to maintain his illusion. Portraitsof marshals, engravings of battles, the King of Rome in a baby’s dress, tall consoles adorned with coppertrophies, laden with imperial relics, medals, bronzes, a miniature of St. Helena, under a globe, picturesrepresenting the same lady all becurled, in a ball-dress of yellow, with leg-of-mutton sleeves and brighteyes;—and all these things: consoles, King of Rome, marshals, yellow ladies, with the high-necked,short-waisted dresses, the bestarched stiffness, which was the charm of 1806. Gallant colonel! It was thatatmosphere of victories and conquests, even more than anything we could say to him, that made himbelieve so innocently in the siege of Berlin. “From that day our military operations were much simplified. To take Berlin was only a matter ofpatience. From time to time, when the old man was too much bored, we would read him a letter from hisson—an imaginary letter, of course, for nothing was allowed to enter Paris, and since Sedan,MacMahon’s aide-de-camp had been sent to a German fortress. You can imagine the despair of that poorchild, without news from her father, knowing that he was a prisoner, in need of everything, perhaps sick,and she ob
liged to represent him as writing joyful letters, a little short, perhaps, but such as a sol

dier onthe field might be expected to write, always marching forward through a conquered country. Sometimesher strength gave way; then they were without news for weeks. But the old man became anxious, couldnot sleep. Thereupon a letter from Germany would speedily arrive, which she would bring to his bedsideand read joyously, forcing back her tears. The colonel would listen religiously, smile with a knowing air,approve, criticise, and explain to us the passages that seemed a little confused. But where he wasespecially grand was in the replies that he sent to his son. ‘Never forget that you are a Frenchman,’ hewould say to him. ‘Be generous to those poor people. Don’t make the invasion too hard for them.’ Andthere were recommendations without end, admirable preachments upon respect for the proprieties, thecourtesy which should be shown to the ladies, a complete code of military honour for the use ofconquerors. He interspersed also some general considerations upon politics, the conditions of peace to beimposed upon the vanquished. Thereupon I must say that he was not exacting. “‘A war indemnity, and nothing more. What is the use of taking their provinces? Is it possible to turnGermany into France?’“He dictated this in a firm voice; and one was conscious of such candour in his words, of such a noble,patriotic faith, that it was impossible not to be moved while listening to him. “Meanwhile the siege went on—not the siege of Berlin, alas! It was the time of intense cold, of thebombardment, of epidemics and of famine. But, thanks to our care, to our efforts, to the unwearyingaffection which multiplied itself about him, the old man’s serenity was not disturbed for an instant. Tothe very end I was able to obtain white bread and fresh meat for him. There was none for anybody buthim, to be sure; and you can imagine nothing more touching than those breakfasts of the grandfather, soinnocently selfish—the old man seated on his bed, fresh and smiling, with a napkin at his chin, and hisgranddaughter beside him, a little pale because of privations, guiding his hand, helping him to drink, andto eat all those forbidden good things. Then, enlivened by the repast, in the comfort of his warm room,the winter wind whistling outside and the snow eddying about his windows, the ex-cuirassier wouldrecall his campaigns in the north and would describe to us for the hundredth time that terrible retreatfrom Russia, when they had nothing to eat but frozen biscuit and horseflesh.“‘Do you understand that, my love? We had horseflesh!’“I rather think that she did understand it. For two months she had had nothing else. From that day,however, as the period of convalescence drew near, our task about the patient became more difficult.That numbness of all his senses, of all his members, which had served us so well hitherto, began todisappear. Two or three times, the terrible volleys from Porte Maillot had made him jump, with his earspricked up like a hunting-dog; we were obliged to invent a final victory of Bazaine under the walls ofBerlin, and guns fired in his honour at the Invalide
s. Another day when his bed had been moved to thewindow—it was, I believe, the Thursday of Buzenval—he saw large numbers of National Guardscollected on Avenue de la Grande Armée.“‘What are all those troops?’ asked the good man; and we heard him mutter between his teeth:“‘Poorly set up! Poorly set up!’“That was all; but we understood that we must take great precautions thenceforth. Unluckily we did nottake enough.“One evening when I arrived, the girl came to me in great trouble.“‘They are to march into the city to-morrow,’ she said.“Was the grandfather’s door open? In truth, on thinking it over afterwards, I remembered that his facewore an extraordinary expression that night. It is probable that he had overheard us. But we were talkingof the Prussians; and the good man was thinking of the French, of that triumphal entry which he had beenawaiting so long—MacMahon marching down the avenue amid flowers and flourishes of trumpets, hisson beside him, and he, the old colonel, on his balcony, in full uniform as at Lutzen, saluting the tornflags and the eagles blackened by powder.“Poor Father Jouve! He had imagined doubtless that 
we intended to prevent him from witnessing thatparade of our troops, in order to avoid too great excitement. So he was 
very careful not to mention it toany one; but the next day, at the very hour when the Prussian b
attalions entered hesitatingly upon thelong road which leads from Porte Maillot to the Tuileries, the window up there opened softly, and thecolonel appeared on the balcony, with his helmet, his long sword, all the glorious old array of one ofMilhaud’s cuirassiers. I wonder still what effort of the will, what sudden outburst of life had placed himthus upon his feet and in his harness. This much is sure, that he was there, standing behind the rail,amazed to find the broad avenues so silent, the blinds of the houses closed, Paris as gloomy as a huge lazaretto, flags everywhere, but such strange flags, white with little crosses, and no one to go to meet oursoldiers.“For a moment he might have thought that he was mistaken.“But no! Yonder, behind the Arc de Triomphe, there was a confused rumbling, a black line approachingin the rising sunlight. Then, little by little, the points of the helmets gleamed, the little drums of Jenabegan to beat, and beneath the Arc de Triomphe, while the heavy tramp of the regiments and the clashingof the sabres beat time, Schubert’s Triumphal March burst forth!“Thereupon in the deathlike silence of the square, a cry rang out, a terrible cry: ‘To arms! To arms! ThePrussians!’ and the four uhlans of the vanguard saw up yonder, on the balcony, a tall old man wave hisarms, stagger, and fall. That time, Colonel Jouve was really dead.”
The Siege of BerlinWE were going up Avenue des Champs-Elysées with Dr. V——, asking the shell-riddled walls, and theside
walks torn up by grape-shot, for the story of the siege of Paris, when, just before we reached theRond-point de l’Etoile, the doctor stopped and, pointing to one of the great corner houses so proudlygrouped about the Arc de Triomphe, said to me: “Do you see those four closed windows up there on that balcony? In the early days of August, thatterrible August of last year, so heavily laden with storms and disasters, I was called there to see a case ofapoplexy. It was the apartment of Colonel Jouve, a cuirassier of the First Empire, an old enthusiast on thesubject of glory and patriotism, who had come to live on the Champs-Élysées, in an apartment with abalcony, at the outbreak of the war. Guess why? In order to witness the triumphant return of our troops.Poor old fellow! The news of Wissembourg reached him just as he was leaving the table. When he readthe name of Napoleon at the foot of that bulletin of defeat, he fell like a log. “I found the former cuirassier stretched out at full length on the carpet, his face covered with blood, andas lifeless as if he had received a blow on the head from a poleaxe. He must have been very tall when hewas standing; lying there, he looked enormous. Handsome features, magnificent teeth, a fleece of curlywhite hair, eighty years with the appearance of sixty. Beside him was his granddaughter, on her kneesand bathed in tears. She looked like him. One who saw them side by side might have taken them for twobeautiful Greek medallions, struck from the same die, one of which was old and earth-coloured, a littleroughened on the edges, the other resplendent and clean-cut, in all the brilliancy and smoothness of afresh impression. “The child’s grief touched me. Daughter and granddaughter of soldiers, her father was on MacMahon’sstaff, and the image of that tall old man stretched out before her evoked in her mind another image noless terrible. I comforted her as best I could, but in reality I had little hope. We had to do with a case ofcomplete paralysis on one side, and at eighty years of age few people recover from it. For three days thepatient lay in the same state of inanition and stupor. Then the news of Reichshofen reached Paris. Youremember in what a strange way it came. Up to the evening, we all believed in a great victory, twentythousand Prussians killed and the Prince Royal a prisoner. I know not by what miracle, what magneticcurrent, an echo of that national rejoicing sought out our poor deaf-mute in the depths of his paralysis;but the fact is that on that evening, when I approached his bed, I did not find the same man there. His eyewas almost clear, his tongue less heavy. He had the strength to smile at me, and he stammered twice: “‘Vic-to-ry!’“And as I gave him details of the grand exploit of MacMahon, I saw that his features relaxed and hisface lighted up.“When I left the room, the girl was waiting for me at the door, pale as death. She was sobbing.“‘But he is saved!’ I said, taking her hands.“The unhappy child hardly had the courage to reply. The true report of Reichshofen had been placarded;MacMahon in retreat, the whole army crushed. We gazed at each other in consternati
on. She was indespair, thinking of her father. I trembled, thinking of the old man. He certainly could not stand this freshshock. And yet what were we to do? Leave him his joy, and the illusions which had revived him? But inthat case we must lie.“‘Very well, I will lie!’ said the heroic girl, quickly wiping away her tears; and with radiant face sheentered her grandfather’s chamber. “It was a hard task that she had undertaken. The first few days she had no great difficulty. The goodman’s brain was feeble, and he allowed himself to be deceived like a child. But with returning health hisideas became clearer. We had to keep him posted concerning the movement of the armies, to draw upmilitary bulletins for him. Really, it was pitiful to see that lovely child leaning night and day over hermap of Germany, pinning little flags upon it, and struggling to lay out a glorious campaign: Bazainebesieging Berlin, Froissart in Bavaria, MacMahon on the Baltic. For all this she asked my advice, and Iassisted her as well as I could; but it was the grandfather wh
o was especially useful to us in thatimaginary invasion. He had conquered Germany so many times under the First Empire! He knew all thestrokes beforehand: ‘Now this is where they will go. Now this is what they will do’; and his anticipationswere always realised, which did not fail to make him very proud. “Unlucky it was of no avail for us to take cities and win battles; we never went quickly enough for him.That old man was insatiable! Every day, when I arrived, I learned of some new military exploit.“‘Doctor, we have taken Mayence,’ the girl would say to me, coming to meet me with a heart-brokensmile, and I would hear through the door a joyous voice shouting to me:“‘They are getting on! They are getting on! In a week we shall be in Berlin!’“At that moment the Prussians were only a week’s march from Paris. We asked ourselves at first if itwould be better to take him into the provinces; but as soon as we were outside the city, the state of thecountry would have told him everything, and I considered him still too weak, too much benumbed by hisgreat shock, to let him know the truth. So we decided to remain. “The first day of the investment o
f Paris, I went up to their rooms, I remember, deeply moved, with thatagony at the heart which the closed gates, the fig
hting under the walls, and our suburbs turned intofrontiers, gave us all. I found the good man seated on his bed, proud and jubilant.“‘Well,’ he said, ‘so the siege has begun!’“I gazed at him in blank amazement.“‘What, colonel! you know?’“His granddaughter turned towards me:“‘Why, yes, doctor, that’s the great news. The siege of Berlin has begun.’ “As she said this, she plied her needle with such a sedate and placid air! How could he have suspectedanything? He could not hear the guns of the forts. He could not see our unfortunate Paris, all in confusionand dreadful to behold. What he saw from his bed was a section of the Arc de Triomphe, and in his room,about him, a collection of bric-a-brac of the First Empire, well adapted to maintain his illusion. Portraitsof marshals, engravings of battles, the King of Rome in a baby’s dress, tall consoles adorned with coppertrophies, laden with imperial relics, medals, bronzes, a miniature of St. Helena, under a globe, picturesrepresenting the same lady all becurled, in a ball-dress of yellow, with leg-of-mutton sleeves and brighteyes;—and all these things: consoles, King of Rome, marshals, yellow ladies, with the high-necked,short-waisted dresses, the bestarched stiffness, which was the charm of 1806. Gallant colonel! It was thatatmosphere of victories and conquests, even more than anything we could say to him, that made himbelieve so innocently in the siege of Berlin. “From that day our military operations were much simplified. To take Berlin was only a matter ofpatience. From time to time, when the old man was too much bored, we would read him a letter from hisson—an imaginary letter, of course, for nothing was allowed to enter Paris, and since Sedan,MacMahon’s aide-de-camp had been sent to a German fortress. You can imagine the despair of that poorchild, without news from her father, knowing that he was a prisoner, in need of everything, perhaps sick,and she obliged to represent him as writing joyful letters, a little short, perhaps, but such as a soldier onthe field might be expected to write, always marching forward through a conquered country. Sometimesher strength gave way; then they were without news for weeks. But the old man became anxious, couldnot sleep. Thereupon a letter from Germany would speedily arrive, which she would bring to his bedsideand read joyously, forcing back her tears. The colonel would listen religiously, smile with a knowing air,approve, criticise, and explain to us the passages that seemed a little confused. But where he wasespecially grand was in the replies that he sent to his son. ‘Never forget that you are a Frenchman,’ hewould say to him. ‘Be generous to those poor people. Don’t make the invasion too hard for them.’ Andthere were recommendations without end, admirable preachments upon respect for the proprieties, thecourtesy which should be shown to the ladies, a complete code of military honour for the use ofconquerors. He interspersed also some general considerations upon politics, the conditions of peace to beimposed upon the vanquished. Thereupon I must say that he was not exacting. “‘A war indemnity, and nothing more. What is the use of taking their provinces? Is it possible to turnGermany into France?’“He dictated this in a firm voice; and one was conscious of such candour in his words, of such a noble,patriotic faith, that it was impossible not to be moved while listening to him. “Meanwhile the siege went on—not the siege of Berlin, alas! It was the time of intense cold, of thebombardment, of epidemics and of famine. But, thanks to our care, to our efforts, to the unwearyingaffection which multiplied itself about him, the old man’s serenity was not disturbed for an instant. Tothe very end I was able to obtain white bread and fresh meat for him. There was none for anybody buthim, to be sure; and you can imagine nothing more touching than those breakfasts of the grandfather, soinnocently selfish—the old man seated on his bed, fresh and smiling, with a napkin at his chin, and hisgranddaughter beside him, a little pale because of privations, guiding his hand, helping him to drink, andto eat all those forbidden good things. Then, enlivened by the repast, in the comfort of his warm room,the winter wind whistling outside and the snow eddying about his windows, the ex-cuirassier wouldrecall his campaigns in the north and would describe to us for the hundredth time that terrible retreatfrom Russia, when they had nothing to eat but frozen biscuit and horseflesh.“‘Do you understand that, my love? We had horseflesh!’“I rather think that she did understand it. For two months she had had nothing else. From that day,however, as the period of convalescence drew near, our task about the patient became more difficult.That numbness of all his senses, of all his members, which had served us so well hitherto, began todisappear. Two or three times, the terrible volleys from Porte Maillot had made him jump, with his earspricked up like a hunting-dog; we were obliged to invent a final victory of Bazaine under the walls ofBerlin, and guns fired in his honour at the Invalides. Another day when his bed had been moved to thewindow—it was, I believe, the Thursday of Buzenval—he saw large numbers of National Guardscollected on Avenue de la Grande Armée.“‘What are all those troops?’ asked the good man; and we heard him mutter between his teeth:“‘Poorly set up! Poorly set up!’“That was all; but we understood that we must take great precautions thenceforth. Unluckily we did nottake enough.“One evening when I arrived, the girl came to me in great trouble.“‘They are to march into the city to-morrow,’ she said.“Was the grandfather’s door open? In truth, on thinking it over afterwards, I remembered that his facewore an extraordinary expression that night. It is probable that he had overheard us. But we were talkingof the Prussians; and the good man was thinking of the French, of that triumphal entry which he had beenawaiting so long—MacMahon marching down the avenue amid flowers and flourishes of trumpets, hisson beside him, and he, the old colonel, on his balcony, in full uniform as at Lutzen, saluting the tornflags and the eagles blackened by powder.“Poor Father Jouve! He had imagined doubtless that we intended to prevent him from witnessing thatparade of our troops, in order to avoid too great excitement. So he was very careful not to mention it toany one; but the next day, at the very hour when the Prussian battalions entered hesitatingly upon thelong road which leads from Porte Maillot to the Tuileries, the window up there opened softly, and thecolonel appeared on the balcony, with his helmet, his long sword, all the glorious old array of one ofMilhaud’s cuirassiers. I wonder still what effort of the will, what sudden outburst of life had placed himthus upon his feet and in his harness. This much is sure, that he was there, standing behind the rail,amazed to find the broad avenues so silent, the blinds of the houses closed, Paris as gloomy as a huge lazaretto, flags everywhere, but such strange flags, white with little crosses, and no one to go to meet oursoldiers.“For a moment he might have thought that he was mistaken.“But no! Yonder, behind the Arc de Triomphe, there was a confused rumbling, a black line approachingin the rising sunlight. Then, little by little, the points of the helmets gleamed, the little drums of Jenabegan to beat, and beneath the Arc de Triomphe, while the heavy tramp of the regiments and the clashingof the sabres beat time, Schubert’s Triumphal March burst forth!“Thereupon in the deathlike silence of the square, a cry rang out, a terrible cry: ‘To arms! To arms! ThePrussians!’ and the four uhlans of the vanguard saw up yonder, on the balcony, a tall old man wave hisarms, stagger, and fall. That time, Colonel Jouve was really dead.”